So give me your definition of democracy.
What is a democracy?
>> A democracy is a system in which the
governed govern. You can read a lot of
political theory. You can read the
classics. Um I don't think you get a
definition that is more succinct than
that. Another formulation is Lincoln's
government of by and for the people. And
so in a democracy the people themselves
are the people who govern. It's not
entrusted as responsibility to some
alien authority, some external power,
some other hierarchy. um people take
upon the responsibility and burden and
and promise of governing themselves.
That's the core idea.
>> So how do you know that America in 2025
is not by the people and for the people
that the governed are not actually
governing?
>> So I think there are three
characteristics of any democratic
system. The first is political equality.
People are equal in standing when they
come to make a collective choice. So
when it comes to the Senate for
instance, uh we have one of the most
malortioned upper houses in the world. I
think only Argentina and Brazil among
our peers are more malortioned than
ours. The second characteristic is
responsiveness. There's real authority
amongst the public. When they come
together to make it collective choice,
things happen. And the last thing I
would say is majority rule. But as I
write, I think in very very basic ways,
our system flouts all three of these
things. So over the course of talking
about this book now I've done a lot of
events in Washington DC that is a city
of about 700,000 people in this country
without full representation in Congress.
Elanor Holmes Norton the one delegate
they have cannot cast a vote in the
final passage of legislation in the
house. There are 4 million Americans for
whom that is true. Most of them live in
Puerto Rico. Uh they are governed by the
federal government without a full equal
say in governance.
uh that I think by any reasonable
definition is not a democratic
arrangement. It's something that's
troubled people for many years in this
country. But even beyond that extreme,
those of us who do have representation
have very unequally aortioned
representation. Classic example,
California state of about 40 million
people uh for with its own country be
one of the 40 largest countries in the
world is one of the largest economies in
the world. has the same number of
senators as Wyoming, state of fewer than
600,000 people, fewer in fact than
Washington DC. That means functionally
that people in Wyoming have about 60 or
more than 60 times representation of
people at California do in the Senate. I
don't think that's a merely academic
point. You hear in school that this is
balanced out by the House. It's not
really in a substantive way. The Senate
alone shapes the judiciary. It shapes
the executive branch. Um and obviously
it's a veto point for the passage of
even ordinary legislation. Um so right
away you know and I think the Senate is
a crux of a lot of this. We have a
fundamental piece of our system that
flouts basic uh democratic principles
basic democratic intuitions. Again more
so by international comparison than some
of our peers. No country gets it
perfect. There's no ideal democracy out
there in the world. But I think it's
fair to say that a system is not really
democratic as much as it might purport
to be one. And what about what about the
economic component? How is a vision of
economic equality in your view essential
to having a functional democracy or
having a democracy that is actually
democratic?
>> Yeah. Well, this is one of the central
provocations of the book and I think the
kind of background intuition that people
have in mind even if they don't sort of
know it consciously about democracy is
that we are entitled to an amount of say
a basic level of say over the conditions
that shape our lives. Right. Um we're
not mere victims of circumstance
helplessly thrown about by the universe.
We're not uh the peons of particular
hierarchies of people who are more
powerful us than us or more privileged
than us. That's a basic democratic
intuition. Um and I think you know one
of the things that have gone around
progressive circles over the last decade
or so is you have people like Elizabeth
Anderson for instance who make the point
that we are governed in more spaces than
just the political sphere. uh we spend
about a third of our time at work. The
decisions that are made at the top of
corporations we work for often affect us
more directly, intimately, and
immediately than decisions made in
Washington DC or in our state houses or
city hall. And yet we feel that we're
not democratically entitled to any kind
of voice in those spaces except for
maybe hoping that we can act through
government to regulate the economy. Um,
when we try to do that, we find that
Washington DC and our political
institutions are often dominated by
wealthy people, our bosses. Um, and I
think that when it comes to solving the
concrete problems of inequality,
um, worker power, the absence of worker
power, the absence of worker voice is
one of the things that's contributed to
our current economic situation. That is
a democratic problem. Um, and I think it
sort of suggests suggests democratic
solutions as well.
>> All right, let's let's do an excursion
then back in time.
>> Yeah.
>> To the American founding because one of
your arguments, right, is that America
was not actually intended to be a
democracy, right?
>> That in fact we should understand our
founding
>> almost in terms of a kind of oligarchic
coup.
>> So talk a little bit about your view of
the founding.
>> Right. So, I mean, you know, when you
raise some of the objections that I've
raised about the nature of our system,
conservatives will often say, "Well, you
know, we're a republic, not a
democracy." I think liberals by habit
say, "No, no, no, that's not true. The
founders actually intended democracy,
but they messed up in 50 million
different ways." Um, I think the
conservatives have the better side of
the argument when you actually look at
the historical record. Um, and I think
that people people should understand
that the constitution is forged in a
particular political and economic
context. At the end of the American
Revolution, uh we're in a state of true
economic crisis. A lot of reasons for
this. Land is destroyed and ravaged.
Slaves escape. Trade restrictions are
imposed by the British. Poor farmers,
especially people in the back country
across the nation are appealing uh for
debt relief and for tax relief. They're
asking if they can pay their taxes and
their debts in kind with goods. Um
they're asking for different measures of
economic uh assistance. And one of the
main things they're asking for actually
is the circulation of paper money.
There's a shortage of hard currency in
the country. They believe that the
circulation of paper money will make it
easier for them to pay down their their
obligations. This deeply deeply troubles
the wealthiest people in America. Um
there's a belief that this undermines
the stability of contracts that it
frustrates or uh complicates the
creditworthiness of the country. Um and
there's just this belief too that people
are in economic distress because they
hadn't been frugal enough. They were
spending on gambling and drinking on
luxuries imported from Europe. There's a
lot of
>> My understanding is that they were in
fact spending on drinking.
>> Well, yes to a substantial degree.
>> To a substantial degree. Is that is that
the source of economic distress across
the country? Probably not. But there's a
lot of colorful writing that Woody
Holton goes through in Unruly Americans
if people want another read on this. Um,
and so people are successfully appealing
to state governments for this relief
with the exception of a state like
Massachusetts, very conservative in its
design with the state constitution. It
resists these appeals. In fact, it
increases taxes. Um, and you have this
uprising, which people may have heard
about in school, Sha's rebellion, this
this armed uprising um that is
eventually put down and it alarms the
founders significantly. There have been
abortive attempts to rework the articles
and to reform government before then. Um
but they come to understand that the
state government has gotten under
control. They were actually directing
the economic uh situation in the country
and something needed to be done. They
needed a stronger sovereign federal
government that could act directly upon
people that could request taxes and
revenue directly from people. um and
that would actually be less accessible
democratically than the prevailing order
had been. Um and they come to uh
Philadelphia in 1787 with that
understanding. And this is not a matter
of speculation. We have one of the very
first speeches made at the conventions
made by Edmund Randolph of Virginia
where he says look the thing that
actually brought us together here is the
excess excess of democracy at the state
uh constitutional level. We have
pamphlets and obviously the federalist
papers. We we have a real body of
information um that informs us as to
what they were thinking when they
designed some of these institutions. And
um you know it's not history that I
think most Americans are familiar with
or are encouraged to think about. But it
matters. It matters in getting us to
understand why the institutions we have
function the way that they do. Um but I
also think it gives us a kind of
permission. This was not some kind of
sacred compromise that came down uh a
mountain on on tablets like this was a
particular contingent agreement. Um and
we should consider ourselves empowered
with all we know now about governance
with the values we have now to make
dramatic changes to the political system
uh with just as much right as the
founders did.
>> Right? But it is also in a way an
invitation that Americans have have been
[clears throat] taking accepting right
uh since barely after the ink was dry on
the constitution. Uh because I think
there's another narrative which says a
number of influential founders for
different reasons envisioned a more
aristocratic
form of republican government than what
we've ended up with. Um but some of that
just sort of evaporated at the start.
Right? founders did not anticipate
political parties. Founders imagined a
version of the of the electoral college
or at least some did where literally the
electors would be, you know, wise men
deliberating to, right? And that that
collapses very quickly and then you just
have a sequence across the 19th and 20th
century where the country, you know,
steadily becomes more responsive to uh
to democratic majorities. And this
starts with Andrew Jackson, which who is
currently a figure in great disrepute on
the left, but democratizes the system in
a way that that once led to him being
celebrated right there, you know, in the
in the old days of the, you know, the
Jefferson Jackson dinners that the
Democratic that the Democratic party
used to have and and all of the
narratives around New Deal liberalism
celebrate Jackson as a democratizer, but
you have the expansion of the franchise
over time to women, to freed slaves,
African-Americans, and so on, right? And
so you have by the time you reach the
civil rights era and the middle of the
20th century, right, you have a
landscape where that founding
constitution, you have the direct
election of senators. So America
becomes, you would agree, right? Much
more democratic.
>> Of course, I would I wouldn't dispute
that at all. We we're we're living in a
much more democratic society today in
all kinds of ways than we were in 1787.
I wouldn't dispute that. I think the the
case I'm making though is that the
central institutions
um that the founders set up in 1787 um
in many ways survive today. Yes, we have
the direct election of senators that is
true but we have equal aortionment still
which is one of the central compromises
they made at the convention um for all
they might have distrusted disliked
democracy. Madison and Hamilton both
thought that the principle of equal
aortment went too far in advantaging uh
the small states. They say this at the
convention. They say this in the
federalist papers. The small states are
going to not walk out. In fact, Gunning
Bedford of Delaware says during the
convention,
>> keep Rhode Island happy.
>> We got to got to keep them happy. But,
you know, Gunning Bedford, I think,
makes a speech at convention where he
says basically, look, we will succeed.
We will join some other foreign power if
we don't get a pres preservation of
equal aortionment which we'd had under
the articles of confederation um in the
new system. Right? So that feature which
Madison warns about I think quite uh
cogently at the convention continues to
be perverse and continues to generate
perverse outcomes for us to this day. Uh
people have talked about the Senate in
this respect especially if population
trends continue you know small and small
proportion of the country will win a
greater and greater proportion of the
seats. This is going to continue to
distort governance and actually the
distortions are going to worsen. a
presidency that we've seen in the last
six months especially I think validates
some of the concern people had at the
founding about whether they're creating
some kind of monarchical or quasi
monarchical uh executive. Um and so I
think that you know for all we've done
to expand the right to vote democratize
the system include the public in in more
and more places I think all of that is
is real but I think it's time for us to
really consider all of these things. I
think it's time for us to consider, you
know, at the extent that people are
angry about Donald Trump again, what are
the elements of the system that allowed
Donald Trump to rise as a political
figure and that have sustained them? I
think there to uh to an ironic extent
some of the elements that the founders
hoped would prevent somebody like Donald
Trump from coming into